# Introduction

Words and sentences are how humans communicate with one another, so we want computers to use words and sentences like us.

In Python, we store something like a word, a sentence, or a paragraph as a **string**. A string is a sequence of characters that can be any length. This can contain letters, numbers, symbols, and spaces. 

What we will learn:

1. Slice strings
2. Select specific characters from strings
3. Search strings for characters
4. Iterate through strings
5. Use strings in conditional statements

<u>Activity</u>

1. Save your favorite word as a string to the variable `favorite_word`.

```
favorite_word = "James"
```

2. Print `favorite_word`.

```
print(favorite_word)
```



# They're all Lists!

A string is much like a list except they are full of a specific data type called *characters* or *chars*. 

Each character in the string has an index.

```
favorite_tv_show = "Community"
```

We can get a specific letters from any string using the index. 

```
>>> favorite_tv_show[1]
'o'
```

Like list indexes, to get the first character of a string you need to use the `0` index. 

```
>>> favorite_tv_show[0]
'C'
```

The indices of strings must be integers, you would get a `TypeError` if you tried to select a non-integer index.

```
>>> favorite_tv_show['C']
Traceback (most recent call last):
  File "<stdin>", line 1, in <module>
TypeError: string indices must be integers, not str
```

<u>Activity</u>

1. One of the most common things that are represented by strings are names. Save your name as a string to the variable `my_name`.

```
my_name = "Alicia"
```

2. Select the first letter of the variable `my_name` and save it to `first_initial`.

```
first_initial = my_name[0]
```



# Cut Me a Slice of String

We can select entire chunks of characters from a string, using the slicing concept we learned in lists:

```
string_name[first_index:last_index]
```

This is called *slicing* a string. When we are slicing a string, we create a **new** string that starts at the `first_index` and includes that character. The `last_index` is where the string ends at (but excludes) the `last_index`. 

```
favorite_tv_show = "Community"
```

```
#The indices of all the characters
C|o|m|m|u|n|i|t|y
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
```

We want a new string containing the letters `munity`, so we slice `favorite_tv_show`:

```
favorite_tv_show[3:9]
```

The character at the first index `m` is included and we have to add 1 to the end index so we can include all the letters. Looking at the diagram, you can see this.

We can also have open ended selections. We can remove the first index so the slice starts at the beginning of the string. If we remove the end index so the slice continues to the end of the string. 

```
>>> favorite_tv_show[:3]
'Com'
>>> favorite_tv_show[3:]
'munity'
```

<u>Activity</u>

1. You’re a programmer working for *Copeland’s Corporate Company*. At this company, each employee’s user name is generated by taking the first five letters of their last name.

   A new employee, Rodrigo Villanueva, is starting today and you need to create his account. His `first_name` and `last_name` are stored as strings in **script.py**.

   Create a variable `new_account` by slicing the first five letters of his `last_name`.

```
first_name = "Rodrigo"
last_name = "Villanueva"
new_account = last_name[:5]
```

2. Temporary passwords for new employees are also generated from their last names.

   Create a variable called `temp_password` by creating a slice out of the third through sixth letters of his `last_name`.

```
temp_password = last_name[2:6]
```

# Concatenating Strings

Concatenate two existing strings into a new string.

```
first_part = "Com"
second_part = "munity"
```

Create a new string concatenating them together like this:

```
favorite_tv_show = first_part + second_part
```

There are no spaces here. You manually add in spaces when concatenating strings.

```
sentence = "My favorite TV show is " + favorite_tv_show
>>> sentence
My favorite TV show is Community
```

<u>Activity</u>

1. *Copeland’s Corporate Company* has realized that their policy of using the first five letters of an  employee’s last name as a user name isn’t ideal when they have multiple  employees with the same last name.

   Write a function called `account_generator` that takes two inputs, `first_name` and `last_name` and concatenates the first three letters of each and then returns the new account name.

```
first_name = "Julie"
last_name = "Blevins"

def account_generator(first_name, last_name):
  return first_name[:3] + last_name[:3]
```

2. Test your function on the `first_name` and `last_name` provided in **script.py** and save it to the variable `new_account`

```
new_account = account_generator(first_name, last_name)
```



# More and More String Slicing (How Long is that String?)

`len()` returns the number of characters in a string.

```
>>> favorite_tv_show = "Community"
>>> len(favorite_tv_show)
9
```

The spaces are counted in the length of the string.

```
>>> sentence = "My favorite TV show is Community"
>>> len(sentence)
32
```

`len()` is useful to find the last character in a string when you don't know the length of a string.

```
>>> length = length(favorite_tv_show)
>>> favorite_tv_show[length]
```

This will generate an `IndexError` because the indices start at 0 so you must use `len(string_name) - 1`.

```
>>> favorite_tv_show[length-1]
'y'
```

You can slice the last several characters of a string using `len()`.

```
>>> favorite_tv_show[length-4:]
'nity'
```

With the `len()` statement, you can use the starting index and by leaving out the final index you slice that amount of characters from the end of `n` is the amount you subtract from `len()`.

<u>Activity</u>

1. *Copeland’s Corporate Company* also wants to update how they generate temporary passwords for new employees.

   Write a function called `password_generator` that takes two inputs, `first_name` and `last_name` and then concatenate the last three letters of each and returns them as a string.

```
def password_generator(first_name, last_name):
	return first_name[len(first_name)-3:] + last_name[len(last_name)-3:]
```

2. Test your function on the provided `first_name` and `last_name` and save it to the variable `temp_password`.

```
temp_password = password_generator(first_name, last_name)
```

# Negative Indices

There is a much easier way to get the last characters of a string. Using negative indices! It counts backward from the end of the string so `favorite_tv_show[-1]` is the last character.

```
>>> favorite_tv_show = "Community"
>>> favorite_tv_show[-1]
'y'
>>> favorite_tv_show[-3]
'i'
>>> favorite_tw_show[-3:]
'ity'
```

<u>Activity</u>

1. Use negative indices to find the the second to last character in `company_motto`. Save this to the variable `second_to_last`.

```
company_motto = "Copeland's Corporate Company helps you capably cope with the constant cacophony of daily life"
second_to_last = company_motto[-2]
```

2. Use negative indices to create a slice of the last 4 characters in `company_motto`. Save this to the variable `final_word`. 

```
final_word = company_motto[-4:]
```

# Strings are Immutable

Every time we use an operation, we can create a brand new string.

Strings are *immutable* which means we can't modify a string once we create it. We can use strings to create other strings, but not edit them.

*Mutability* means that some data types can be changed, some data types like strings cannot be changed.

<u>Activity</u>

1. The most recent hire at *Copeland’s Corporate Company* is a fellow named Rob Daily. Unfortunately, Human Resources seem to have made a bit of a typo and sent over the wrong `first_name`.

   Try changing the first character of `first_name` by running

   ```
   first_name[0] = "R"
   ```

   The error provided:

   ```
   Traceback (most recent call last):
     File "script.py", line 4, in <module>
       first_name[0] = "R"
   TypeError: 'str' object does not support item assignment
   ```

2. Oh right! Strings are immutable, so we can’t change an individual character. Okay, that’s no problem we can still fix this! 

   Concatenate the string `"R"` with a slice of `first_name` that includes everything but the first character and save it to a new string `fixed_first_name`.

   ```
    #fixed_first_name = first_name[0]
    fixed_first_name = "R" + first_name[1:]
   ```

# Escape Characters

Sometimes, when working with a string, you want to include special characters that already have meaning in Python such as double quotes (`""`). 

```
sentence = "My favorite TV show is "Community"."
```

We accidentally ended the string early. To do this, we can use the *escape characters* (`\`) in front of the special character.

```
sentence = "My favorite TV show \"Community\""
```

 <u>Activity</u>

1. When Rob Daily (remember him? From the last exercise?) set up his account he set his password to be

   ```
   theycallme"crazy"91
   ```

   His password was causing some errors in the system because of the `"` marks. Rewrite his password using escape characters and save it to the variable `password`.

   ```
   password = "theycallme\"crazy\"91"
   ```

# Iterating through Strings

We can iterate through a string using `for`  or `while` loops and use it to manipulate and analyze strings. 

```
def print_each_letter(word):
  for letter in word:
    print(letter)
```

This code will iterate through each letter in a given word and will print in the terminal:

```
>>> favorite_tv_show = "Community"
>>> print_each_letter(favorite_tv_show)
C
o
m
m
u
n
i
t
y
```

1. Let’s replicate a function you are already familiar with, `len()`.

   Write a new function called `get_length()` that takes a string as an input and returns the number of characters in that string. Do this by iterating through the string, don’t cheat and  use `len()`!

   ```
   def get_length(string):
     count = 0
   	for letter in string:
   		count += 1
     return count
   ```

   

# Strings and Conditionals (Part One)

What if we want to do more when we iterate through a string? We can include a conditionals inside iterations to do many things!

```
favorite_tv_show = "Community"
counter = 0
for character in favorite_tv_show:
  if character == 'm':
    counter = counter + 1
print(counter)
```

In this code, we count the number of `m`s in the string "Community" (it's 2). First we define the string, `favorite_tv_show` and a variable called `counter` which is set to 0. Now, the `for` loop will iterate through each character in `favorite_tv_show` and compare it to the letter `m`. Once every character is printed, we will have the number of `m`s in "Community". 

<u>Activity</u>

1. Write a function called `letter_check` that takes two inputs, `word` and `letter`. 

   This function should return `True` if the `word` contains the `letter` and `False` if it does not.

   ```
   def letter_check(word, letter):
     for character in word:
       if letter == character:
         return True
     return False
   ```

# Strings and Conditionals (Part Two)

There's an easier way of iterating through a string to check if a certain character is in it. 

`in` checks if one string is contained within another.

Here's the syntax:

```
letter in word
```

Here, `letter in word` is used as a boolean expression and it will return True if the string in `letter` is in the string `word`. Otherwise, it will return false. You can do with this individual characters as well as entire strings.

```
>>> "m" in "Community"
True
>>> "mun" in "Community"
True
>>> "a" in "Community"
False
>>> "commune" in "Community"
False
```

<u>Activity</u>

1. Write a function called `contains` that takes two arguments, `big_string` and `little_string` and returns `True` if `big_string` contains `little_string`.

   For example `contains("watermelon", "melon")` should return `True` and `contains("watermelon", "berry")` should return `False`.

   ```
   def contains(big_string, little_string):
   	if little_string in big_string:
   		return True
   	else:
   		return False
   ```

2. Write a function called `common_letters` that takes two arguments, `string_one` and `string_two` and then returns a list with all of the letters they have in common.

   The letters in the returned list should be unique. For example, 

   ```
   common_letters("banana", "cream")
   ```

   should return `['a']`.

   ```
   def common_letters(little_string, big_string):
     list = []
     for letter in big_string:
       if letter in little_string and list.count(letter) == 0:
         list.append(letter)
     return list
   ```

# Review

Great work! I hope you are now starting to see the potential of strings and  how they can be used to solve a huge variety of problems.

In this lesson you learned:

- A string is a list of characters.
- A character can be selected from a string using its index `string_name[index]`. These indices start at 0.
- A ‘slice’ can be selected from a  string. These can be between two indices or can be open-ended, selecting all of the string from a point.
- Strings can be concatenated to make larger strings.
- `len()` can be used to determine the number of characters in a string.
- Strings can be iterated through using `for` loops.
- Iterating through strings opens up a huge potential for applications, especially when combined with conditional statements.

Let’s put your new skills to the test!

<u>Activity</u>

1. *Copeland’s Corporate Company* has finalized what they want to their username and temporary password  creation to be and have enlisted your help, once again, to build the  function to generate them. In this exercise, you will create two  functions, `username_generator` and `password_generator`.

   Let’s start with `username_generator`. Create a function called `username_generator` take two inputs, `first_name` and `last_name` and returns a `username`. The username should be a slice of the first three letters of their  first name and the first four letters of their last name. If their first name is less than three letters or their last name is less than four  letters it should use their entire names.

   For example, if the employee’s name is `Abe Simpson` the function should generate the username `AbeSimp`.

   ```
   def username_generator(first_name, last_name):
     modified_first_name = ""
     modified_last_name = ""
     if len(first_name) < 3:
       modified_first_name = first_name[:len(first_name)-1]
       modified_last_name = last_name[:4]
     elif len(last_name) < 4:  
       modified_first_name = first_name[:3]  
       modified_last_name = last_name[:len(last_name)]
     else:  
       modified_first_name = first_name[:3]  
       modified_last_name = last_name[:4]
     return modified_first_name + modified_last_name
   ```

   ```
   def username_generator(first_name, last_name):
       if len(first_name) < 3:
           user_name = first_name
       else:
           user_name = first_name[0:3]
       if len(last_name) < 4:
           user_name += last_name
       else:
           user_name += last_name[0:4]
       return user_name
     
   ```

2. Great work! Now for the temporary password, they want the function to take  the input user name and shift all of the letters by one to the right, so the last letter of the username ends up as the first letter and so  forth. For example, if the username is `AbeSimp`, then the temporary password generated should be `pAbeSim`.

   Start by defining the function `password_generator` so that it takes one input, `username` and in it define an empty string named `password`.

   ```
   def password_generator(username):
   	password = ""
   ```

3. Inside `password_generator` create a for loop that iterates through the indices username by going from `0` to `len(username)`.

   To shift the letters right, at each letter the for loop should add the previous letter to the string `password`. 

   ```
   def password_generator(user_name):
       password = ""
       for i in range(0, len(user_name)):
           password += user_name[i-1]
       return password
   ```



# The Quiz

1. Given the string `least_favorite_fruit = "cantaloupe"`, what piece of code would create a string that was equal to `"lou"`?

```
least_favorite_fruit[5:8]
```

2. What code would select the letter “p” from the string `good_fruit = "Raspberry"`?

```
good_fruit[3]
```

3. What character will be selected from the string `cool_fruit = "watermelon"` using the code `cool_fruit[len(cool_fruit) - 2]`?

```
"o"
```

4. Consider the following function. What would it print to the terminal?

   ```
   def tell_me_about_icecream(favorite_icecream):
       response = "My favorite icecream is" + favorite_icecream + "."
       print(response)
   
   tell_me_about_icecream("chocolate")
   ```

   ```
   My favorite icecream ischocolate.
   ```

   

5. Which of the following expressions is `False`?

```
"s" in "watermelon"
```

6. What will the following code print to terminal?

```
def print_some_characters(word):
  for i in range(len(word)):
    if i % 2 == 0:
      print(word[i])

print_some_characters("watermelon")
```

```
w
t
r
e
o
```
